Added more detailed description about pipeline structure (#585)
nf-core/nf-co.re: markdown/developers/pipeline_structure.md

# nf-core contribution guidelines

> Nf-core pipelines adhere to common design principles that have been crafted through discussions and extensive real-world experiences with pipelines over time. We understand, however, that not all about nf-core pipelines is obvious and can be confusing to people new to nf-core. To help you along getting started with nf-core, writing your pipeline or contribute otherwise, we have created this documentation. Hopefully you will find most things that might confuse you described here, and if not, be sure to bug the nf-core Slack channel!

Reviewer: Minor minor super-minor things that I generally try to stick to when writing nf-core docs:

* Lower case `nf-core`, try to avoid starting a sentence with it because it looks weird
* I usually put each sentence on its own line in the md file. Doesn't affect rendering on the website and makes the diffs easier to read if people change things.

```suggestion
All nf-core pipelines adhere to common design principles that have been crafted through discussions and extensive real-world experiences with pipelines over time.
We understand, however, that not all about nf-core pipelines is obvious and can be confusing to people new to nf-core.
To help you along getting started with nf-core, writing your pipeline or contribute otherwise, we have created this documentation.
Hopefully you will find most things that might confuse you described here, and if not, be sure to bug the nf-core Slack channel!
```

## General

> The best way to write a new pipeline is to start from the template (see here). After doing that, you will have a number of files in your repository with different purposes. Here's what they are for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start writing a new pipeline you should use the `nf-core create` command (see [docs](/developers/adding_pipelines)).
This will create a skeleton pipeline with a number of files, each with different purposes. Here's what they are for:
```

### Files

* `main.nf`: This is the main nextflow file which will get executed if the pipeline is run. It parses all parameters, loads the modules with options and defines the specific order in which these are executed.

> * `nextflow.config`: The main nextflow configuration file. It contains the default pipeline parameters, nextflow configuration options and information like pipeline and nextflow version, among others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `nextflow.config`: The main nextflow configuration file. It contains the default pipeline parameters, nextflow configuration options and information like pipeline and minimum nextflow version, among others.
  The `nextflow.config` also defines different configuration profiles that can be used to run the pipeline. See the [Configuration docs](/usage/configuration) for more information.
```

* `README.md`: Basic information about the pipeline and usage

> * `nextflow_json.schema`: The JSON schema file is used for pipeline parameter specification. It can be automatically created usint the `tools` package. In the pipeline, this is used for printing out a help message to the user or validating the input parameters. The nf-core tools utility package furthermore uses the JSON Schema for launching pipelines. Furthermore, `nextflow.config` defines different profiles that can be used to run the pipeline. These include the test profiles, which load, when used, the above mentioned configuration files into the `nextflow.config` file. Additionaly, the following profiles are available by default: `debug`, `conda`, `docker`, `singularity` and `podman`‚ which are used to run the pipeline in debug mode, using a conda environment or a using a container technology (docker, singularity or podman).

Reviewer: I didn't really understand the bit about loading stuff into the config file? Anyway I moved the bit about `nextflow.config` into the bullet for that file and rewrote a little to point to the configs docs instead.

```suggestion
* `nextflow_json.schema`: The JSON schema file is used for pipeline parameter specification. This is automatically created using the `nf-core schema build` command. It is used for printing command-line help, validating input parameters, building the website docs and for building pipeline launch interfaces (web and cli).
```

> * `CHANGELOG.md`: The change log contains information about, well, changes made to the pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `CHANGELOG.md`: Information about the changes made to the pipeline for each release.
```

* `LICENSE`: The license - should be MIT

* `CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md`: The nf-core code of conduct.

> * .gitattributes: Lists GitHub settings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `.gitattributes`: Git settings, primarily getting the `.config` files to render with Nextflow syntax highlighting on <github.com>
```

> * .gitignore: Lists files that should be ignored by GitHub.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `.gitignore`: Files that should be ignored by git.
```

### Directories

> * `.github`: Other GitHub specific files, e.g. for specifying templates and GitHub actions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `.github/`: Other GitHub specific files, e.g. for specifying templates and GitHub actions
```

> * `assets`: Any additional files needed for the pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `assets/`: Any additional files needed for the pipeline
```

> * `bin`: The bin directory simply contains any scripts that must be directly accessible within a pipeline process. Anything in this directory can be directly called from within Nextflow processes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `bin/`: Directory for scripts that must be directly accessible within a pipeline process. Anything in this directory can be directly called from within Nextflow processes.
```

> * `conf`: The `conf` directory contains a `base.config` file which is always loaded into `nextflow.config` and describes basic pipeline configurations, like CPU and memory usage for processes with low, medium and high requirements. Additionaly, `conf` contains a `igenomes.config` file which describes the locations of popular genomes that can be automatically downloaded for a pipeline run. Finally, the `test.config` and `test_full.config` files are test configurations that are loaded during test runs. Since DSL2, it also contains a `modules.config` file, which defines module-specific configurations and is explained further down in the "DSL2 and modules" section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `conf/`: Configuration files, including a `base.config` file which is always loaded into `nextflow.config` and describes basic pipeline configurations, like CPU and memory usage for processes with low, medium and high requirements. Additionaly, most pipelines also have a `igenomes.config` file which describes the locations of popular genomes that can be automatically downloaded for a pipeline run. Finally, the `test.config` and `test_full.config` files are test configurations that are loaded during test runs. Since DSL2, it also contains a `modules.config` file, which defines module-specific configurations and is explained further down in the "DSL2 and modules" section.
```

> * `docs`: Markdown files for documenting the pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `docs/`: Markdown files for documenting the pipeline
```

> * `lib`: The lib directory contains groovy utility functions. Currently, this includes the `Schema.groovy`, `Headers.groovy`, `Completion.groovy` and `Checks.groovy` files. These are called from within the nf-core pipeline to do groovy-related tasks, like formatting the header for the command line. Any larger groovy function you want to call in the code should therefore go in here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `lib/`: The lib directory contains groovy utility functions. Currently, this includes the `Schema.groovy`, `Headers.groovy`, `Completion.groovy` and `Checks.groovy` files. These are called from within the nf-core pipeline to do common pipeline tasks, like formatting the header for the command line. Any larger groovy function you want to call in the code should therefore go in here.
```

> * `modules`: Contains local and nf-core modules

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `modules/`: Contains pipeline-specific and common nf-core modules
```

## Continuous integration testing

> To assure that nf-core pipelines don't break after some change is made to the code, we use automated continuous integration (CI) testing. This is done via GitHub actions, which are defined in the `.github/workflows` directory. Parameters and file paths are set in the `conf/test.config` and `conf/test_full.config`. Please see also [here](https://nf-co.re/developers/adding_pipelines#add-some-test-data) for how to set-up the test workflow for your pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To assure that nf-core pipelines don't break after some change is made to the code, we use automated continuous integration (CI) testing. This is done via GitHub actions, which are defined in the `.github/workflows` directory. Parameters and file paths are set in the `conf/test.config` and `conf/test_full.config`. Please see also [here](/developers/adding_pipelines#add-some-test-data) for how to set-up the test workflow for your pipeline.
```

## DSL2 and modules

Nextflow DSL2 allows for a more modularized design of pipelines and the reuse of components. Currently, most nf-core pipelines are still entirely written in DSL1, but in the near future all pipelines will be written in DSL2. The nf-core team has developed a set of design patterns on how to best implement DSL2 pipelines, which should be used by all nf-core pipelines in order to assure standardization and the reuse of components. The following is meant to help understand certain design choices and how a nf-core DSL2 pipeline should be build.

> ### modules

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Modules
```

> Each pipeline has a `modules` directory which contains all the module code. A module here depicts a single process which involves - if possible - only a single tool/software. The `modules` directory is furthermore divided into `local`and `nf-core`sub-directories, which themselves each have a `process`/`software` and `subworkflow` directory. Modules contained in the `local` directory are specific to the pipeline, whereas `nf-core` modules are installed from the `nf-core/modules` repository. For instance, most pipelines that involve FastQ files will run the FastQC tool for quality control. The module needed for this can be easily reused from the `nf-core/modules` directory using the `nf-core/tools`package. The `process` directories contain modules which define single processes, which smaller workflows are contained in the `subworkflow` directories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each pipeline has a `modules` directory which contains all the module code. A module here depicts a single process which involves - if possible - only a single tool/software. The `modules` directory is furthermore divided into `local`and `nf-core` sub-directories, which themselves each have a `process`/`software` and `subworkflow` directory. Modules contained in the `local` directory are specific to the pipeline, whereas `nf-core` modules are installed from the `nf-core/modules` repository. For instance, most pipelines that involve FastQ files will run the FastQC tool for quality control. The module needed for this can be easily reused from the `nf-core/modules` directory using the `nf-core/tools`package. The `process` directories contain modules which define single processes, which smaller workflows are contained in the `subworkflow` directories.
```

Reviewer: Might be worth having a paragraph making it very clear that no files in the `nf-core` directory (from nf-core/modules) should ever be edited. Instead, use the `nf-core modules` cli commands to install, update and remove these files. Automatic code checks will fail if these differ from the central nf-core/modules repository at all.

Could also be good to go on to explain how versioning works. But I don't think that this is actually written yet, so maybe leave that until it exists 😆

Author: Yes good point!

> All modules furthermore load utility functions from a `functions.nf` script that must be contained in the `modules/local/process` directory. It contains simple functions to initialize the module options, get the software version, save files and get a path from a string. For further explanations of modules and how they should be structured in DSL2 pipelines, check out the [nf-core modules repo](https://github.com/nf-core/modules).

Reviewer: Sorry, I have a pet-hate against the word _furthermore_, I can't help but delete it wherever I see it 😆 

```suggestion
All modules load utility functions from a `functions.nf` script that must be contained in the `modules/local/process` directory. It contains simple functions to initialize the module options, get the software version, save files and get a path from a string. For further explanations of modules and how they should be structured in DSL2 pipelines, check out the [nf-core modules repo](https://github.com/nf-core/modules).
```
